---
# This is a section on the main page. This is included from _layouts/home.html.
---
## Administrivia

### Enrollment
This is a **2 unit DeCal**. Since it is a DeCal, the course is P/NP. You must
attend an infosession and complete Lab 0 to apply. If you are selected for the
course, we will send you a course enrollment code by September 9.

### Lecture
Lectures are scheduled for **Tuesdays** for the Beginner section and
**Thursdays** for the Advanced section, from **8 to 9pm** the OCF Lab, located
at **171 MLK** (MLK basement down the hall from the student store). **Attendance
is mandatory, with two allowed unexcused absences.** Some other conflicts, such
as exams, may be excused if you provide prior notice. Please only come to the
lab on the day corresponding to the section you are in.

**Lecture will double as office hours** for students to come in and ask
questions about the lab work. The one-hour "lecture" slot will include some
lecturing but will also include time to to work on the lab assignment with the
help of present facilitators. Note that we only have 30 computers in the lab,
but 40 people are enrolled in each course, so **please bring a laptop** if you
can.

### Labs
The primary assignment in this course will be **weekly lab work**.
Labs are designed to be be significantly hands-on. You will be working on
real systems, configuring, and fixing things, setting up services, and so on.

Each lecture corresponds with a lab, labeled by a "b" or "a" (for Beginner or
Advanced) and the week number. Except for b1 and a1, labs will general be
released about a week ahead of the corresponding lecture. You are *highly
encouraged* to look over the lab, and try to start it, *before* coming to
lecture each week. This will allow you to better utilize the help of the
facilitators, and will help you understand the lecture in a concrete way.

Each lab will be due **before the following lecture**. For example, lab a1 will
be released about a week before lecture a1. Lecture a1 will be on Sept 13. Then
lab a1 will be due before lecture a2 (that is, Sept 20 at 8pm). Please stay on
top of lab work! If extenuating circumstances prevent you from completing your
lab on time, please let us know as soon as possible and we will try to be
accommodating. We expect that you turn in all labs on time, but allow **two late labs** to be turned in before the semester ends. 
